feat: Post #1 - Preparing for the known "unknown" - scaling a service 10x in 30 days (#1)
6fold/blog: post/0001/README.md

# Preparing for the "known" unknown - scaling a service 10x in 30 days

_At sixfold we provide real-time visibility for supply-chains, you can read more on [sixfold.com](https://sixfold.com)._

> Before we dive into the details, a bit of background. As part of the Sixfold product, we ingest quite a lot of data from different sources. Two biggest categories of the data are what we call _transport data_ and _telemetry data_ - the "what" and the "where".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before we dive into the details, a bit of background. As part of the Sixfold product, we ingest quite a lot of data from different sources. Two biggest categories of the data are what we call _transport data_ and _telemetry data_
```

I find that part confusing and not adding much, especially since you explain what both are right below

The transport data gives us an idea as to what the transport plan is, what goods are expected to be delivered to which point in the world. The telemetry data is what allows us to be real-time, it is the data from the vehicles taking care of executing the plan.

> In simplistic terms, merging these data streams allows us to figure out what is going on with the transport. This is important as it means our product scales along two axis, we increase the number of transports we get and we increase the number of vehicles we are connected to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Simply put, merging these two data streams alone allows us to figure out what is going on with the transport. 

But this also means that as our customer-base grows, our product scales along two axes: the number of transports and the number of vehicles we are connected to.
```

Author: I'm not sure about the "alone" part, I'll skip that, but make the other changes

---

> We are anticipating a significantly increased amount of business coming from Transporeon starting September 1st

This was roughly the marching-orders that the engineering team received at the start of August 2020 from the executive team.

> Behind the scenes, work had started on an initiative, that would eventually lead to [Sixfold and Transporeon joining forces in shaking up the visibility market](https://sixfold.com/news/sixfold-and-transporeon-join-forces-to-build-the-world-s-most-powerful-real-time-visibility-network), and this was the moment we needed to start working on making sure we could take care of the engineering side.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Behind the scenes, work had started on an a secret initiative, that would eventually lead to [Sixfold and Transporeon joining forces in shaking up the visibility market](https://sixfold.com/news/sixfold-and-transporeon-join-forces-to-build-the-world-s-most-powerful-real-time-visibility-network), and this was the moment we needed to start working on making sure we could take care of the engineering side.
```

It might be redundant, but behind the scenes could well be: "On TP Side" 

I think that it's also something we could quickly mention / make fun of:

Tell all the engineers to forget about all the plans they have:

_Leads: "Now we're doing _scalability"_

_Engineers: "Why?"_

_Leads: "Because we need to do scalability"_

Author: Hmm, I'm not sure that would show us in a good light. Let's just make it seem like the team was all on the same page. The blockquote is in essence what the entire engineering team knew, so I don't see why we should emphasise that some parts were kept from engineering.

The difference of scale we are talking here is going from hundreds of thousands of transports per month, to millions of transports per month - a magnitude of difference.

## Planning for scale

> Although from the start, we've built our product to be resilient and scalable, we knew well enough that some trouble was bound to pop-up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even if we had been building our product to be resilient and scalable from the start, we knew well enough that some trouble was bound to pop-up.
```

Author: That makes it sound like we hadn't built our product to be scalable. I get the confusion, will try and reword:

```suggestion
Although we had built our product to be resilient and scalable from day one, we still knew some trouble was bound to pop-up.
```

We therefore assumed that nearly every subteam of the company had to make some changes and assembled a working group for this specific goal. This included people from various engineering teams, as well as people from business operations and customer success.

We also realised as the deadline was quite close, that the team should likely work and act as any regular team would - have frequent enough standups to share current status, as well as a dedicated communications channel, in our case, a channel in Slack.

Quite quickly the team realised that we shouldn't guess at which part of the systems are in danger, **we should test for it**.

One of the perks of hosting our entire service on the cloud & kubernetes, is the speed at which we can set up a dedicated environment that looks very similar to the production environment (apart from the data). As such, we used a dedicated environment for this load test, where we could simulate the increase in load.

> Some time ago we had built a set of tools allowing us to generate realistic looking data. Originally, this was intended as a sales tool, so that we could demo our product. However, over time the tooling had become much more useful - allowing us to test new features, as well as build further tools, such as an end-to-end blackbox test of our entire product.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We were able to piggy-back on a set of in-house tools to generate realistic looking data. Originally, this was intended as a sales tool, so that we could demo our product. However, over time the tooling had become much more useful - allowing us to test new features, as well as build further tools, such as an end-to-end blackbox test of our entire product.
```

This tooling now became incredibly handy, as it allowed us to simulate the increase in load by just generating the data ourselves.

With the system under load, we could proceed to figuring out which parts needed a helping hand.

## Identifying and eliminating the bottlenecks

Our architecture is built around [Apache Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org), meaning various microservices communicate with each other via message-passing.

> One of the main metrics we use to gauge the stability of our system is how well the services are processing these messages - also known as lag. If a service is unable to process messages at appropriate speeds, it will start falling behind on them, which in turn surfaces as lag - a clear identifier that a service is not able to operate at required scale/speed.

Reviewer: Super neat and simple – technical enough, yet graspable by non-tech people I believe – really like it!

One of the first, perhaps unsurprising, findings was that services in general were doing fine. As the load increased, so did the number of processed messages.

We did notice, however, that if certain services were to undergo new deployments, or other situations in which not all instances were available at the same time (for example, a partial outage), it would fall behind on the messages and never quite catch up - they were operating at their limit.

> The team decided to dive in, the leading assumption being that processing of messages was not fast enough. We were hopeful that we could increase throughput by optimising code before resorting to more hardware. The leading indicator pointing towards this was that we were seeing an elevated CPU usage on the service pods, but not on the database behind them, hinting that a lot of work was happening in the service code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We decided to dive in, the leading assumption being that processing of messages was not fast enough. We were hopeful that we could increase throughput by optimising code before resorting to more hardware. The leading indicator pointing towards this was that we were seeing an elevated CPU usage on the service pods, but not on the database behind them, hinting that a lot of work was happening in the service code.
```

I think we should just stick to _we_, otherwise it's confusing, I had to stop everytime I read "The team" – it feels off

Reviewer: "We were hopeful that we could increase throughput by optimising code before resorting to more hardware. The leading indicator pointing towards this was that we were seeing an elevated CPU usage on the service pods, but not on the database behind them, hinting that a lot of work was happening in the service code."

I believe that this whole sentence should be bold, it subtly shows our expertise

Author: ```suggestion
We decided to dive in, the leading assumption being that processing of messages was not fast enough. **We were hopeful that we could increase throughput by optimising code before resorting to more hardware. The leading indicator pointing towards this was that we were seeing an elevated CPU usage on the service pods, but not on the database behind them, hinting that a lot of work was happening in the service code.**
```

### Profiling data-heavy services

> How do you figure out where these CPU cycles are going? You profile the running process! Our services are all running on node, so there are various tools out there. We ended up using the [V8 Inspector Protocol](https://v8.dev/docs/inspector), which is conveniently built into Chrome DevTools. So what did we find?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How do you figure out where these CPU cycles are going? You profile the running process! Our services are all running on [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/), so there are various tools out there. We ended up using the [V8 Inspector Protocol](https://v8.dev/docs/inspector), which is conveniently built into Chrome DevTools. So what did we find?
```

Regexes can be quite expensive! We identified TypeORM, the OSS package we use for DB abstraction, [had some performance issues](https://github.com/typeorm/typeorm/pull/4760/). Luckily we could work around these (and they have since been fixed, so kudos to TypeORM team!).

Similarly, we found that parsing dates in node-postgres could be improved by forgoing some support for edge-cases.

All of this resulted in quite a lot of performance wins on many services that were doing a lot of DB querying. Combining this with some DB detective-work, improving query plans via indices & batching queries together via [dataloaders](https://github.com/graphql/dataloader), we managed to increase the throughput quite significantly.

### Improving GraphQL APIs

> While all of this profiling of internal services was ongoing, we also conducted some load tests for the APIs that serve our frontend applications. These APIs are built on top of a GraphQL stack, that uses [apollo-server](https://github.com/apollographql/apollo-server) at its core.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While all of this profiling of internal services was ongoing, we also conducted some load tests for the APIs that serve our frontend applications. These APIs are built on top of a [GraphQL](https://graphql.org/) stack, that uses [apollo-server](https://github.com/apollographql/apollo-server) at its core.
```

Once again, thanks to some profiling, we identified that apollo itself can be improved by changing its configuration. For example, by disabling plugin-support, which we didn't really need anyway.

We also noticed something about our GraphQL schema - it is quite _deeply nested_.

Due to the way apollo works, this means many processes are serial in nature - you first fetch the user, then you fetch the company, then you fetch the transport.

By analysing the [abstract syntax tree](https://adamhannigan81.medium.com/understanding-the-graphql-ast-f7f7b8e62aa4) of an incoming GraphQL query, we could predict the kinds of data we would need to fetch, and prime the underlying [dataloaders](https://github.com/graphql/dataloader) by already initiating the asynchronous DB queries.

> This resulted in quite a few of our serial DB queries getting turned into parallel queries - shaving off many valuable milliseconds from the API requests.

Reviewer: We could also add there that we reduced the load from the client by:
- introducing the `idle` mechanism
- having the outage page ready and easy to deploy (in case something would go wrong)
- a redirect in the onboarding that would allow us, with the deploy of a config to redirect all users back to TP after being onboarded (not wasting the precious onboarding data)

Author: I like the idea of covering "degradation" plans, the idle mechanism wasn't actually built for the scalability work, I believe it was added as part of a separate incident (where we had some IE user go crazy with requests).

I'll try and squeeze in a section about the work we did for "when the scaling alone is not enough", it can also include us adding autoscalers, just in case.
